LONG-TERM IMPACTS OF BEACH NOURISHMENT ON SHORE ECOSYSTEMS:  INSIGHTS FROM PEA ISLAND NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE

Final Project Summary Report

This report summarizes the objectives, research, and results for our 2019-USCRP sponsored study: W912HZ-19-SOI-0010, titled: "Long-term Impacts of Beach Nourishment on Shore Ecosystems: Insights from Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge". Scientists with the Coastal Studies Institute and East Carolina University issued a research proposal for consideration on June 14, 2019. The project was started in January 2020 and completed, with an intervening COVID-19 delay, in the summer of 2022.

Note that a copy of this sumary report is downloadable from the project's GitHub repository at: https://github.com/<REPO GOES HERE>.


PRINCIPALS:
D. Reide Corbett (PI, Dean & Executive Director)^1
Paul Paris (co-PI; Research Scientist)^1
Rebecca Harrison (Project Partner; Biologist)^2

^1 East Carolina University - Coastal Studies Institute
850 NC 345, Wanchese, NC  27981
252-475-5428; corbettd@ecu.edu
252-475-5430; parisp15@ecu.edu 

^2 US Fish & Wildlife Service; rebecca_harrison@fws.gov


PROPOSED GOALS AND OBJECTIVES:
The objective of the work was premised on three fundamental questions and associated hypotheses:

Question 1: Are there detectable long-term (>5 years) changes seen in swash zone and upper-beach sediments (i.e., grain size distribution and heavy mineral content) between the control and nourished area sites in the time since the 2014 nourishment?
Hypothesis 1: In areas where nourishment sands persist grain-size distribution and mineral content will have equilibrated to local forcing conditions (as driven by dominant ocean waves and winds).


Question 2: Are there detectable long term differences in the subaerial beach morphology, as measured from the lower swash zone to the primary dune toe, between the control and nourished areas?
Hypothesis 2: The beach is dynamically equilibrated so there is little to no significant, long term difference between beach morphology from early 2014 to today or between the control and treatment sites. Changes observed will be due solely to erosive changes and subsequent beach loss due to erosion.


Question 3: Did nourishment have an impact on the distribution of macro-invertebrates and ghost crabs, specifically in the beach swash zones?
Hypothesis 3: The abundance in organisms has recovered and stabilized, and species composition (percent of varying species types) are not statistically different from pre-nourishment (2014) population profiles.


While there have been numerous beach nourishment ecosystem impact studies carried out, both published and not, over the past several decades (Rakocinski et al., 1996; Peterson et al., 2006; Peterson et al., 2014; Bilodeau and Bourgeois, 2004, Jones et al., 2008; Schlacher et al., 2012; Manning, Peterson, and Fegley, 2013; Bishop et al., 2006; Wooldridge et al., 2016; Leewis et al., 2012) dating back to the early 1970s (Hayden and Dolan, 1974), all but a very few of these were restricted in duration from several days to one to two years post-nourishment. Studies looking at impacts and recovery beyond about two years are uncommon leaving gap in our understanding of the possible longer-term impacts (Speybroeck et al. 2006). In recognition of this dearth of longer-term studies we proposed to the U.S. Coastal Research Program (USCRP) a comprehensive investigation whose overarching goal was to evaluate impacts on beach sediment character and essential habitat associated with beach nourishment for a period spanning 6 recruitment seasons post-nourishment--from 2015 through 2020, inclusive. The work would also includes three seasons (2012 - 2014) of data prior to the mid-2014 re-nourishment event.

One distinctive aspect of the work is found in the location selected. The 2014 replenishment event studied was conducted along ocean beaches in the Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge (PINWR), a site with minimal infrastructure and limited human use, factors that can add intractable confounding variation to such studies. Only a single infrastructure artifact, North Carolina Highway 12, is located near the study beaches. 


MOTIVATION FOR THE STUDY:
A beach nourishment study to evaluate the spatial and temporal impact of nourishment on beach morphology and indigenous species habitat was carried out along a section of ocean shoreline in the PINWR beginning in the summer of 2014 (Corbett and Walsh, 2017). This study was borne opportunistically out of an emergency directive issued by then North Carolina Governor Patrick McCrory, and in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), that resulted in the placement of approximately 1.5 million cubic yards of sand along a two-mile stretch of beach at the southern end of the refuge in that same year. The directive was in response to continued annual destruction to NC Highway 12. Highway 12 is positioned immediately behind a low, easily breached primary dune along this section of the PINWR and was regularly damaged by storm-generated ocean waves that frequent the area. The restoration was intended as a stopgap measure, one that would provide interim protection for Highway 12 until a longer-term elevated bridge could be built to circumvent this troublesome area known locally as "S-Turns".

Recognizing the research opportunities offered by the emergency nourishment work on the PINWR, the USFWS began development of a monitoring instrument to track changes and evaluate impacts associated with the placement of the new fill sand. Variance in sand grain size and mineralogical composition from native materials can potentially be problematic, both in terms of the susceptibility of the beach and dune to post-placement erodibility and loss, as well as possibly bringing harm to indigenous micro and macrofauna, both contraindicated conditions relative to the Refuge’s wildlife-first mandate (USFWS, 2013; Manning et al., 2014). Though a pre-placement sediment compatibility evaluation was completed, it was unclear whether sands taken from source---Wimble Shoals, a submerged sand body located some 3 miles offshore of the restoration site---would be compatible with the existing environment. In July 2014 scientists from the USFWS and East Carolina University's (ECU's) Coastal Studies Institute began quarterly monitoring the nourished beach area. The project monitoring effort concluded in December 2016, spanning a 2-year period post-restoration, and an unpublished report detailing all findings and recommendations for future actions (Corbett and Walsh, 2017) was delivered back to the PINWR and the USFWS in December 2017. A copy of Corbett and Walsh, 2017 is included in the project's GitHub repository.

The work by Corbett and Walsh, (2017) focused on pre/post (before and after) changes associated with the experimental PINWR nourishment project. In addition, the study tracked  evolution in terms of morphology equilibrium and habitat restoration between two juxtaposed treatment (nourished beach) and control (natural beach) areas. Like many studies across the U.S., this effort only spanned the first two years after sand placement. As stated earlier, this proposed investigation was a comprehensive, long-term, comparative study of the existing PINWR nourishment and control areas to further evaluate changes in sediment character and biological abundance on timescales spanning several years. This proposed project differentiated itself through its focus on the longer-term impacts associated with beach nourishment. As already discussed, typical pre-post studies evaluate change for at most 1-2 years. While valuable for understanding short term response, these leave a significant gap in our understanding of what the long-term effects of sand-placement might be to the beach and to the native species inhabiting that beach. This is especially relevant given the examples provided by other investigators who demonstrate that recovery can, and often does, extend in time beyond two years. 


THE PEA ISLAND STUDY SITE:
The Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge (PINWR) consists of some 4,900 acres of upland, marshes, and beaches on North Carolina's Outer Banks. The 13 mile-long refuge is bounded on the north by Oregon Inlet, and to the south by the Village of Rodanthe (Figure 1). Winter storms are the principal driver of change here, with tropical cyclones playing a subordinate aperiodic role. Humans are also, and in increasing frequency, agents of change across much of the Outer Banks, though protections established as part of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) mandate and the presence of the wildlife refuge have curtailed anthropogenic impacts along Pea Island.

INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE

The principal long-term barometer of change along the Outer Banks, as in most coastal communities, is measured along the ocean beach, and assessed by the amount of accretion or erosion occurring at a given location. Most of the Outer Banks ocean beaches, as with most beaches in the State of North Carolina, are experiencing net erosion. Long-term ocean beach erosion rates along Pea Island and the PINWR, as measured by the North Carolina Division of Coastal Management (NCDCM) in many places exceed 5 ft/yr, and in some locations approach 10 ft/yr (NCDCM, 2011). This erosion threatens the protective beach and dune systems that front the island’s extensive backbarrier wetland habitats. It also leaves North Carolina Highway 12, the sole transportation link connecting the seven populated villages along Hatteras Island to the south with mainland access to the north, vulnerable. These vulnerabilities are apparent at several locations along Pea Island, but the southernmost section at Rodanthe is perhaps the most assailable, with beach, dune, and highway often damaged with the passage of even modest low-pressure systems.


DURATION OF WORK--PROPOSED AND ACTUAL:
When the original proposal was submitted it was projected that the study would require no more than two (2) calendar years (24 consecutive months) to complete with all deliverable obligations met. Two unforeseen complications intervened that resulted in a petition for extension. The first was a administrative delay in funding release. This pushed the project start back by about 4 months, from October 2019 to January 2020. The second was SARS-CoV-2 (a.k.a. COVID-19). COVID didn't interrupt field work but it did bring about a response from the university that closed the CSI Campus for an entire calendar year. This shutdown included laboratory access--which was required for processing the 540 field samples collected. An extension was granted which allowed the project, originally slated for the end of Federal FY Q1 in December 2021, to continue until the end of Q3 FY 2022 (30 June, 2022). This extension allowed for the completion of sample processing, and in turn, the remainder of the work that is summarized here.


PROJECT DELIVERABLES:
Results from the study were to be provided to the USCRP, the greater scientific and management communities, and the public at-large via three pathways: 1.) professional contributions to and extensions of our current understanding of the biotic and abiotic impacts associated with beach nourishment; 2.) education for the general public on the these same impacts; 3.) the ready sharing of data and the analyses (in reproducible form) behind the reported results with the scientific community and any other interested parties. 

Pathway 1: professional scientific contributions included the preparation of a pair of articles targeted for peer-reviewed publication for an audience of scientists, engineers, and select management and planning groups. The first paper, titled <PUT PAPER #1 FINAL TITLE HERE>, addresses the subject of beach nourishment and the biotic and abiotic response from the perspective of recovery. The concept of system recovery following some type of large-scale disturbance commonly receives mention in the published literature, but is seldom explicitly defined. In this paper recovery is addressed in the context of defining notions of baseline and equilibrium states within systems that are both varied and dynamic in space and time. The second paper, also targeted for a cohort audience, reports on the findings gleaned from the nourishment impact study that is the centerpiece of this USCRP-sponsored project. Both papers are, at this writing, in peer-review for [hopeful] publication in subject-appropriate journals. Pre-review manuscripts (pre-prints) can be downloaded from the project's GitHub site at: https://github.com/<OUR SITES REPO>. 

Project progress and research results were also communicated to cohort audiences through a series of live and pre-recorded presentations. Two of these came during the American Shore and Beach Preservation Association's (ASBPA) annual national conferences. The first of occurred in 2020. The conference was conducted entirely online (COVID-driven), with our presentation (covering research results and findings to date) delivered "live" via Zoom. The second was dispatched as a pre-recorded product (COVID fears, again) during the hybrid ASBPA 2021 meeting in New Orleans, LA. Further, preliminary findings, and project progress were reported during select annual USCRP meetings with USCRP staff and colleagues. All of the latter reporting was performed remotely.  

In addition to the various presentations and the two peer-review published articles, and in tandem with the preparation of those articles, a comprehensive bibliography of topically-related publications was compiled. This bibliography was not published but is available for download in both bibtex and in <STYLE?> Microsoft Word (docx) formats from https://github.com/<OUT SITES REPO>.


Pathway 2: public-at-large communications and education contributions included outreach through presentations delivered both live and pre-recorded. In the original proposal it was stated that a presentation and discussion associated with this investigation, findings, and beach nourishment, in general was to be provided to the general public through our CSI-Science on the Sound (SotS) lecture series. Unfortunately, COVID-19, in shutting down the CSI Campus also brought to a halt the SotS. Further, while a resumption of the monthly lecture series is planned for sometime later in 2022, this will not occur before this project's June 30 2022 deadline is reached. In lieu of this, the presentation was dispensed as a part of our CSI Campus annual Open House event. Open House brings together for one day each year on the research campus CSI scientists and the general public. During the event the community gets to see first-hand the research underway at the institute and speak directly with the researchers doing the work. One highlight of this year's event in the Coastal Processes Laboratory was beach nourishment and the USCRP-funded work done by the group on Pea Island. More than 300 people attended the Saturday event. <THIS MIGHT BE MISLEADING...SHOULD TWEAK ABIT>

A final public-targeted production was originally proposed as a printed brochure, a "fact-sheet" that explained the beach nourishment process and related potential environmental impacts. This was modified, with prior permission from the USCRP, to be produced not as a printed document but instead as a video short. This video was recorded during the winter, 2022 and is accessable though CSI's You Tube channel: <URL TO VID>.


DATA SOURCES AND DATA DISSEMINATION:
Data used for the investigation comes from sources at the North Carolina Department of Transportation (invertebrate populations and sediment characteristics, temporal coverage: 2012-2013, 2017-2019), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (invertebrate populations, temporal coverage: 2014-2015), and ECU/CSI (invertebrate populations, sediment characterizations, geomorphic, and environmental data, temporal coverage: 2014-2017, 2020). All biological population surveys, sediment, and environmental data associated with the project is stored in the project's GitHub Repository. All or part of these data can be downloaded from: https://github.com<OUR REPO HERE>.


RESEARCH FACILITIES:
All field and laboratory work, as well as data compilation and analysis associated with the proposed project, was conducted by a team of scientists and technicians from the Coastal Studies Institute (CSI). The Institute, a multi-institutional University of North Carolina System partnership, is located on East Carolina University's Outer Banks Campus, in Wanchese on Roanoke Island, on the Outer Banks of North Carolina. The Institute is equipped with several 4-wheel drive on-road trucks, capable of towing a class 3 load, and off-road only (i.e., beach-capable) 4-wheel gasoline-powered all-terrain vehicles for field equipment and personnel deployment. Field deployable electronics and instrumentation relevant to this project include:  GPS and RTK-GPS, handheld thermometers, refractometers, and clinometers. CSI also houses a fully-equipped sedimentology laboratory on-campus and scientists and technical staff to process samples and analyze data generated by the study. 


METHODS (Field Work):
In accord with stated project research objectives field work was conducted on the Pea Island study site beaches. A total of four season-aligned single-day surveys were orchestrated beginning in January, 2020. Interim surveys took place in April and July. The final effort was completed in October 2020. During each survey invertebrate populations, sediment characteristics, and environmental support data were interrogated along each of 27 shore-normal transects (Figures 2 & 3). Eleven of these transects were located in a area adjacent to, but sufficiently far removed from, the nourished beach site. The remaining 16 transects fell on the impacted beach. Transect interval with sites was 161 meters (528 feet or 0.1 statute miles). Separation between the control and impacted (nourished) beach sites was 966 meters (3168 feet or 0.6 statute miles). Biological populations were counted by collecting 3 shallow (40 cm deep) cores in the beach swash zone and sieving the collected material through a 1 mm mesh sieve, manually sifting through the sample for the presence of three indigneous species: E. talpoida, D. variabilis, and S. squamata. A fifth group, amphipods, were also counted, however, species determination was not attempted. After counting the collected core material was returned to the swash. The three core counts were pooled to produce a single per transect count for each species. 

INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE

INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE

In addition, O. quadrata were counted on the upper beach area using a 1 meter square sampling quadrat. The quadrat was randomly "tossed" three times on the upper beach and crab den openings that fell within the delineated area were counted. Again, the three quadrate counts were pooled for a resultant per transect abundance. 

Each field survey also included capture of an GNSS-generated (RTK-GPS) shore-normal beach surface profile, surface and shallow depth sediment shear strength (compaction), along with temperatures and surf water salinities. 


METHODS (Laboratory):
Materials collected in the field include 153 beach sediment samples per survey (a total of 540 samples overall for the 2020 field campaign). In the lab each sample was dried and then mechanically sieved at 0.5 phi mesh intervals to determine size distribution characteristics and assayed for heavy mineral content. All field collected data, including sediment lab analysis results (distribution as determined by sieving) was recorded in Microsoft Excel spreadsheets and then exported into comma-separated text for analyses and later distribution. These data are available on the project's GitHub repository: <https://github.com/repo>.


BEACH NOURISHMENT ECOSYSTEM IMPACT INVESTIGATION: BACKGROUND, FINAL RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS (Text borrowed from the project proposal and study paper preprint):

Beach nourishment, the placement of fill sand on a beach to restore its elevation, seaward extent, and form, and to provide added protection from future erosion-producing events (e.g., intense storms), is a common and preferred soft-engineering response to the eroding ocean beach (Speybroeck et al., 2006). In some instances, such as in North Carolina, where regulations prohibit hard structures (e.g., seawalls, bulkheads, sandbags), it is one of the few mitigation options that remain for communities in response to chronic beach erosion. For others, there is ample evidence that hard-structure approaches suffer high failure rates and in many cases cause more damage than had no action been taken at all (Pilkey and Wright, 1989).

Another reason commonly cited in favor of nourishment over other solutions has to do with biotic impacts and habitat displacement, which are often thought to be relatively short-term, low impact phenomena on the restored beach (Rakocinski et al., 1996; Peterson et al., 2006; Bilodeau and Bourgeois, 2004, Jones et al., 2008). For some time period, however, the post-nourishment restoration zone is transformed from a congenial habitat into an intensely altered area ill-suited for the survival of most, if not all, indigenous flora and fauna (Voila et al., 2014, Speybroeck et al., 2006). Beach nourishment places a thick (1 - 3 m) layer of sand on the beach, burying existing invertebrate populations, resulting in temporary local extinctions of indigenous species, most of which cannot withstand rapid, deep burial (Stull et al., 2016; Leewis et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2008). The additional foreign-sourced sand also transiently alters the morphology of the surf-zone and subaerial beach, and may also alter the sand grain-size distribution, sorting, and mineralogy (Viola et al., 2014; Leewis et al., 2012; Speybroeck et al., 2006). The locally altered sand-replenished beach may then offer a hostile environment for species in nearby unaffected areas that might infiltrate and attempt to repopulate the impacted zone in the weeks, months and years that follow (Viola et al., 2014; Bilodeau and Bourgeois, 2004; Peterson et al., 2000). Re-population times can vary considerably (Viola et al., 2014; Leewis et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2008; Peterson et al., 2000). Further, species composition in the replenished beach can differ from that prior to nourishment (Leewis et al. 2012) as more opportunistic and adaptable species recover quicker or are able to take advantage of the altered environment more readily than their local counterparts. In addition, delayed recovery, along with changes in invertebrate species populations pre and post nourishment can have effects that can reverberate up the trophic hierarchy to affect larger species (e.g., shorebirds, crabs, fish) that rely on these invertebrate populations as a food source (Voila et al., 2014; Leewis et al., 2012; Bilodeau and Bourgeois, 2004).

Peterson et al, (2014) examined multigenerational species response and evolution over a four year period on North Carolina’s Bogue Banks. Leewis et al., (2012) looked at the fate of a set of dominant macro-invertebrates using space-for-time substitution, where multiple similar spatial samples are used in place of longer-term study at a single site (Walker et al., 2010) to model impact and response over longer time periods. Both investigators, and others (e.g., Viola et al., 2014), maintain that the focus on shorter-term recovery represents a fundamental design ‘flaw’ that limits practical usefulness of the results (Peterson et al. 2014; Speybroeck et al., 2006) and further, that little is as yet known about the longer term biotic impacts attributable to nourishment (Viola et al., 2014; Leewis et al., 2012; Peterson et al., 2014). Yet, investigators conducting studies of lesser duration report incomplete biotic recovery after months (Stull et al., 2016; Wooldridge et al., 2016; Schlacher et al., 2012) to two years or more (Wooldridge et al., 2016; Bilodeau and Bourgeois, 2004; Peterson et al., 2000) after the nourishment project was completed.

A common criticism of the published scientific literature that addresses replenishment and its impact on beach ecosystems is the lack of studies that span more than a year or two beyond completion of beach reconstruction (Peterson et al. 2014; Leewis et al. 2012; Speybroeck et al. 2006). Some investigators (e.g., Peterson et al. 2014; Viola et al., 2014; Leewis et al., 2012) maintain that the focus on shorter-term recovery represents a fundamental design ‘flaw’ that limits practical usefulness of the results and further, that little is as yet known about the longer term biotic impacts attributable to nourishment (Viola et al., 2014; Leewis et al., 2012; Peterson et al., 2014). A recent survey performed by the authors looked at 21 relevant peer-reviewed papers from 2000 – 2022 (Paris et al. in process) and found that the average duration for beach ecology-replenishment impact studies over the past two decades is 15 months. Many of these short-term studies do appear to adequately address eco-impact concerns, with most reporting complete system recovery after timespans ranging from only a few weeks up to one to two years (van Egmond et al. 2018; Corbett and Walsh, 2017; Woolridge et al. 2016; Leewis et al. 2012; Jones et l. 2008; Fenster et al. 2006; Menn et al. 2003; Rakocinski et al, 1996; Gorzelany and Nelson, 1983; Hayden and Dolan, 1974, and the reviews by Speyboreck et al, 2006 and Greene, 2002). A smaller number of studies, however, report a failure to recover after one to two recruitment seasons ( Peterson et al. 2014; Peterson et al. 2006; Bilodeau and Bourgeois, 2004). Further, it is unclear if the recoveries reported are sustained over longer time spans (e.g., > 2 to 4 years) along the replenished beach (Leewis et al. 2012; Peterson and Bishop, 2005). This study considers a longer-term ecosystem response, encompassing a total of 9 recruitment seasons dating from 2012 through 2020, that straddle asymmetrically the 2014 replenishment event on the PINWR. 

For all the invertebrate species included in this study seasonal oscillations in abundance dominate the temporal variance seen in the collected survey data. This signal is particularly strong for Emerita where seasonality accounts for almost 70% of the total observed variance. Similarly, seasonal cycling accounts for more than 50% for O quadrata, 43% for D variabilis, more than 26% for S squamata, and 12% for the undifferentiated amphipod group. 

If we hold to the definition of recovery as a restoration of abundance variation on the impacted beach to baseline conditions where species outcomes may differ but not in any statistically significant way, we conclude that recovery for E talpoida was immediate. Some type of impact must have been experienced by Emerita but there is little in the data to suggest when or by how much. Further, there is little to suggest that any longer-term impacts occurred. The response for D variabilis revealed a potential, albeit short-lived, benefit to the species from the replenishment event. The 2015 recruitment season that followed saw a large jump in Donax populations on both the impacted and baseline beaches—one perhaps due in part to changes in substrate characteristics brought about in the fill sands placed a year earlier. Given what is known of Donax’s preference for a finer swash substrate, the finer grained fill sands used in the 2014 replenishment, combined with a reduction in O quadrata populations (a primary predator) likely contributed to the brief population peak seen in 2015. Beach substrate mixing and subsequent homogenization quickly brought sediments on the impacted beach into alignment with the baseline and in turn Donax populations were restored back to baseline in accord.   

O quadrata impacts, one the other hand, were more conspicuous. O. quadrata's response was driven by a partial reduction in population, possibly as a result of burial and/or crushing during replenishment operations. This cannot be quantitatively verified but some impact of this sort almost certainly occurred. Recovery came as conditions on the impacted beach were restored allowing re-habitation likely though migration from adjacent areas. This recolonization required, based on the data, about 2 years to complete.  

Evidence in the data here does suggest that a replenishment impact did affect the amphipod group, but it isn’t clear from this study’s results how much of the variance observed can be attributed to replenishment disturbance versus natural cycling and idiosyncratic behavior. Abundance densities observed for the 2015 season are similar in magnitude to that seen prior to 2014 and replenishment. However, for seasons after 2015 amphipod populations declined on both beaches–the exception here being the 2019 recruitment season. Overall, for this group abundances were low for the entire study period, and so it is difficult to draw meaningful conclusions.  

Like the amphipods, S squamata abundances were consistently low on both the control and replenished beaches. The species was almost entirely absent for much of the 9 years considered in the study. A suitable explanation for this relative absence has been elusive.  

An additional possibility offering explanation for the response of the indigenous Pea Island Ocean beach taxa to the 2014 replenishment event is the timing of the event itself. While it wasn’t researched as a part of this investigation, Corbett and Walsh (2017) pointed to the work having been scheduled in the summer season as a contributing factor to the limited mortality that seems to have transpired. The viability of such an argument is, however, much debated in a scientific community that remains ignorant in many respects regarding the detailed life histories of the species being observed and studied. Considering this, it is perhaps best to limit for now focus to the size and sorting characteristics of the fill sands used to reconstruct the ocean beach in providing a new post-replenishment ecosystem that was able to satisfy the demands of the indigenous species for rapid recolonization and recovery as the best explanation for the results observed in this investigation. 



References:
A. L. Bilodeau and R. P. Bourgeois. Impact of beach restoration on the deep-burrowing ghost shrimp, Callichirus islagrande. Journal of Coastal Research, 20(3):931–936, 2004.

D. Corbett and J. P. Walsh. Beach Nourishment Monitoring at Pea Island National Wildlife Refuge, Final Report. Technical report, Department of Geological Sciences, East Carolina University, 2017.

M. S. Fenster, C. B. Knisley, and C. T. Reed. Habitat preference and the effects of beach nourishment on the federally threatened northeastern beach tiger beetle, Cicindela dorsalis dorsalis: Western Shore, Chesapeake Bay, Virginia. Journal of Coastal Research, 22(5):1133–1144, 2006.

J. F. Gorzelany and W. G. Nelson. The effects of beach replenishment on the benthos of a sub-tropical Florida beach. Marine Environmental Research, 21(2):75–94, 1987.

R. H. Green. Sampling design and statistical methods for environmental biologists. John Wiley & Sons, 1979.

B. Hayden and R. Dolan. Impact of Beach Nourishment on Distribution of Emerita talpoida, the Common Mole Crab. Journal of the Waterways, Harbors and Coastal Engineering Division, 100(2):123–132, 1974.

A. R. Jones, A. Murray, T. A. Lasiak, and R. E. Marsh. The effects of beach nourishment on the sandy- beach amphipod Exoediceros fossor: Impact and recovery in Botany Bay, New South Wales, Australia. Marine Ecology, 29:28–36, 2008.

L. Leewis, P. M. van Bodegom, J. Rozema, and G. M. Janssen. Does beach nourishment have long- term effects on intertidal macroinvertebrate species abundance? Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 113:172–181, 2012.

L. M. Manning, C. H. Peterson, and M. J. Bishop. Dominant macrobenthic populations experience sustained impacts from annual disposal of fine sediments on sandy beaches. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 508:1–15, 2014.

I. Menn, C. Junghans, and K. Reise. Buried alive: Effects of beach nourishment on the infauna of an erosive shore in the North Sea. Senckenbergiana Maritima, 32(1):125–145, 2003.

NC Division of Coastal Management (NCDCM). North Carolina 2011 Long-Term Average Annual Oceanfront Erosion Rate Update Study. Technical report, NC Division of Coastal Management, 2011.

Paris et al. in process

C. H. Peterson, M. J. Bishop, G. A. Johnson, L. M. D’Anna, and L. M. Manning. Exploiting beach filling as an unaffordable experiment: Benthic intertidal impacts propagating upwards to shorebirds. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 338(2):205–221, 2006.

C. H. Peterson, D. H. M. Hickerson, and G. G. Johnson. Short-Term Consequences of Nourishment and Bulldozing on the Dominant Large Invertebrates of a Sandy Beach. Journal of Coastal Research, 16(2):368–378, 2000. Publisher: Coastal Education & Research Foundation, Inc.

[3] O. H. Pilkey and H. Wright. Seawalls versus beaches. Journal of Coastal Research, 4(Special Issue: The Effects of Seawalls on Beaches):41–67, 1989.
C. H. Peterson and M. J. Bishop. Assessing the environmental impacts of beach nourishment. Bioscience, 55(10):887–896, 2005.

C. H. Peterson, M. J. Bishop, L. M. D’Anna, and G. A. Johnson. Multi-year persistence of beach habitat degradation from nourishment using coarse shelly sediments. Science of the Total Environment, 487:481–492, 2014.

C. F. Rakocinski, R. W. Heard, S. E. LeCroy, J. A. McLelland, and T. Simons. Responses by mac- robenthic assemblages to extensive beach restoration at Perdido Key, Florida, USA. Journal of Coastal Research, pages 326–353, 1996.

T. A. Schlacher, R. Noriega, A. Jones, and T. Dye. The effects of beach nourishment on benthic invertebrates in eastern Australia: Impacts and variable recovery. Science of The Total Environment, 435-436:411–417, 2012.

J. Speybroeck, D. Bonte, W. Courtens, T. Gheskiere, P. Grootaert, J.-P. Maelfait, M. Mathys, S. Provoost, K. Sabbe, E. W. Stienen, et al. Beach nourishment: an ecologically sound coastal de- fence alternative? a review. Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems, 16(4):419–435, 2006.

E. Van Egmond, P. Van Bodegom, M. Berg, J. Wijsman, L. Leewis, G. Janssen, and R. Aerts. A mega-nourishment creates novel habitat for intertidal macroinvertebrates by enhancing habitat relief of the sandy beach. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 207:232–241, 2018.

S. M. Viola, D. M. Hubbard, J. E. Dugan, and N. K. Schooler. Burrowing inhibition by fine textured beach fill: implications for recovery of beach ecosystems. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 150:142– 148, 2014.

L. Walker, D. Wardle, R. Bardgett, and B. Clarkson. The use of chronosequences in studies of ecological succession and soil development. Journal of Ecology, 98:725–736, 2010.

T. Wooldridge, H. J. Henter, and J. R. Kohn. Effects of beach replenishment on intertidal invertebrates: A 15-month, eight beach study. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 175:24–33, 2016.

############################### ########################################################
